An Open Window on Chicago


Midwinter night,
Clark and Halstead brushed with this week's snow
grill lights blinking at the corner
decades ago
Smokestack poked above roofs and watertower
standing still above the blue
lamped boulevards,
sky blacker than th' east
for all the steel smoke
settled in heaven from South.
Downtown - like Batman's Gotham City
battleshipped with Lights,
towers winking under clouds,
police cars blinking on Avenues,
space above city misted with fine soot
cars crawling past redlites down Avenue,
exuding white wintersmoke -
Eat Eat said the sign, so I went in the Spanish Diner
The girl at the counter, whose yellow Bouffant roots
grew black over her pinch'd face,
spooned her coffee with knuckles
puncture-marked,
whose midnight wrists had needletracks,
scars inside her arms: -
"Wanna go get a Hotel Room with me?"
The Heroin Whore
thirty years ago come haunting Chicago's midnite streets,
me come here so late with my beard!

Corner Grill-lights blink, police car turned
and took away its load of bum to jail,
black uniforms patrolling streets
were suffering
lifts a hand palsied by Parkinson's Disease
to beg a cigarette.

The psychiatrist came visiting this Hotel 12th floor -
Where does the Anger come from?
Outside! Radio messages, images on Television,
Electric Networks spread
fear of murder on the streets -
"Communications Media"
inflict the Vietnam War and its anxiety on every private skin
in hotel room or bus -
Sitting, mediating quietly on Great Space outside -
Bleep Bleep dit dat dit radio on, Television murmuring,
bombshells crash on flesh
his flesh my flesh all the same -
The Dakini in the hotel room turns in her sleep
while War news flashes thru Aether -
Shouts at streetcorners as bums
crawl in the metal policevan.
And there's a tiny church in middle Chicago
with its black spike to the black air
And there's the new Utensil Towers round on horizon.
And there's red glow of Central Neon
on hushed building walls at 4 AM,
And there's proud Lights and Towers of Man's Central City
looking pathetic at 4 AM, traveller passing through,
staring outta hotel window under Heaven -
Is this tiny city the best we can do?
These tiny reptilian towers
so proud of their Executives
they haveta build a big sign in middle downtown to Advertise
old Connor's Insurance sign fading on brick building side -
Snow on deserted roofs and Parkinglots -
Hog Butcher to the World!?
Taxi-Harmonious Modernity grown rusty-old -
The prettiness of Existence! To sit at the window
and moan over Chicago's stone and brick
lifting itself vertical tenderly,
hanging from the sky.

Elbow on the windowsill,
I lean and muse, taller than any building here
Steam from my head
wafting into the smog
Elevators running up and down my leg
Couples copulating in hotelroom beds in my belly
and bearing children in my heart,
Eyes shining like warning-tower Lights,
Hair hanging down like a black cloud -
Close your eyes on Chicago and be God,
all Chicago is, is what you see -
That row of lights Finance Building
sleeping on its bottom floors,
Watchman stirring
paper coffee cups by Bronzed glass doors -
and under the bridge, brown water
floats great turds of ice beside buildings' feet 
in windy metropolis
waiting for a Bomb.
