Ecologue

In a thousand years, if there's History
America'll be remembered as a nasty little Country
full of Pricks, thorny hothouse rose
Cultivated by the Yellow Gardeners.
"Chairman Mao" for all his politics, head of a Billion folk, important, old and huge
Nixon a dude, specialized on his industrial Island, a clean paranoid Mechanic -
Earth rolling around, epics on archaic tongues
fishermen telling island tales -
all autos rusted away, trees everywhere.

Rough Wind roar, mapletop mass shaking in window,
a panic Cry from the garden
Bessie Cow's loose near the Corn!

The little dakini palying her bells
and listening to late baritone Dylan
dancing in the living room's forgot almost
th'electric supply's fvanishing
from the batteries in the pasture.
Chairs shifting downstairs, kitchen voices
Smell of applies and tomatoes bubbling on the stove.

Behind the Chicken house, dirt flies from the shovel
hour after hour, tomrorow they'll be a big hole.

The editor sleeps in his bed, morning Chores are done,
Clock hands move noonward, pig roots by flagstone
pathways, papers and letters lie quiet on many desks.

Books everywhere, Kaballa, Gnostic Fragments, 
Mahanirvana and Hevajra Tantras, Boeheme Blake and Zohard, 
Gita and Soma Veda, somebody reads - 
one cooks, another digs a pighouse foundation, 
one chases a cow from the vegetable garden, 
one dances and signs, 
one writes in a notebook, 
one plays with the ducks, 
one never speaks, 
one picks the guitar, 
one moves huge rocks.

The wind charger's propeller
whirrs and trees rise windy
one maple at woods edge's turned red.

Chickens bathe in dust at house wall,
rabbit at fence bends his nose to a handful of Cornsilk,
fly lights on windowsill,

At the end of a long chain, Billy makes a Circle in grass
by the fence, I approach
he stands still with long red stick
stretched throbbing between hind legs
Spurts water a minute, turns his head down
to look and lick his thin pee squirt -
that's why he smells goat like.

Horse by barbed wire licking salt,
lifts his long head and neighs
as I go down by willow thicket
to find the 3-day-old heifer.
At bed in long grass, wet brown fur -
her mother stands, nose covered with a hundred flies.

The well's filled up -
the Cast-iron ram that pushes water uphill by hydraulic pressure flowed from gravity
Can be set to motion soon, and water flow in kitchen sink tap.

Some nights in sleeping bag
Cricket zinging networks dewy meadows,
white stars sparkle across black sky,
falling asleep I listen and watch till eyes close, and wake silent
at 4 AM the whole sky's moved,
a Crescent moon lamps up the woods.

and last week one Chill night, summer disappeared -
little apples in old trees red,
tomatoes red and green on vines,
green squash huge under leafspread,
corn thick in light green husks,
sleepingbag wet with dawn dews
and that one tree red at woods' edge!

Louder wind! there'll be electric to play the Beatles!
At summer's end the white pig got so fat it weighed more than Georgia Ray Bremser's 3 year old baby.
Scratch her name Don't Bite Me under hind leg,
she flops over on her side sweetly grunting, nosing in grass tuft roots, soft belly warm

Eldridge Cleaver exiled with bodyguards in Algiers
Leary sleeping in an iron cell,
John Sinclair a year jailed in Marquette
Each day's paper more violent -
War outright shameless bombs
Indochina to Minneapolis -
a knot in my belly to read between lines,
lies, beatings in jail -
Short breath on the couch -
desolation at dawn in bed -
Wash dishes in the sink, drink tea, boil an egg -
brood over Cities' suffering millions two hundred miles away
down the oilslicked, germ-Chemicaled Hudson river.

Ed Hermit comes down hill
breaks off a maple branch
and offers fresh green leaves to the pink eyed rabbit.
Under birch, yellow mushrooms
sprout between grassblades and ragweed -
eat 'em and you die or get high and see god -
waiting for the exquisite mycologist's visit.

Winter's coming, build a rough wood crib
anad fill it with horse dung, hot horse dung,
all round the hosue sides.

Bucolics and Ecologues!
Hesiod the beginning of the Wrodl,
Virgil the end of his World -
anad Catullus sucked cock in the country
far from the Emperor's police.

Empire got too big, cities too crazy, garbage-filled Rome
full of drunken soldiers, fat politicians,
circus businessmen -
safer, healthier life on a farm, make yr own wine in Italy, smoke yr own grass in America.

Pond's down two feet from drainpipe's rusty top -
Timothy turned brown, covered with new spread manure
sweet smelt in strong breeze,
it'll be covered in snow couple months.
and Leary covered in snow in San Luis Obispo jail?
His mind snowflakes falling over the States.

Did Don Winslow the mason come look at the basement
So we can insulate a snug root cellar
for potatoes, beets, carrots,
radishes, parsnips, glass jars of corn and beans
Did the mortician come and look us over for next Winter?

Black flies walking up and down the metal screen,
fly's leg tickling my forehead-
"I'll play a fly's bone flute and beat an ant's egg drum"
sang the Quechua Injun
high on Huilca snuff, Peruvian Mediaeval DMT.

Phil Whalen in Japan
stirring rice, eyes in the garden,
fine pen nib lain by notebook.

Jack in Lowell farming worms, master of his miniscule deep acre.

Neal's ashes sitting uinder a table piled with books, in an oak drawer,
sunlight thru suburb windows.

O wind! spin the generator wheel, make Power Juice
To run the New Exquisite Noise Recorder, and I'll sing praise of your tree music.

Squash leaves wave and ragweeds lean, black tarpaulin
plastic flutters over the bass-wood lumber pile
Hamilton Fish's Congressional letter
reports "Stiffer laws against peddling smut"
flapping in dusty spiderwebs by the windowscreen

What's the Ammeter read by the Windmill? 
Will we record Highest Perfect Wisdom all day tomorrow,
or Blake's Schoolboy uninterrupted next week?

Fine rain-slant showering the grey porch
Returnable Ginger Ale Bottles on the wood rail,
white paint flaked off into orange flowered blossoms

Out in the garden, rain all over the grass, leaves, roofs, rain on the laundry.

September 4
